Welcome to this new chapter where we will talk
about minimum spanning trees, what are they? Why
do we need them? How to find it in a graph? All of
these questions will be answered in this chapter.
Before knowing what are minimum spanning trees,
we first need to know what are spanning trees.
In graphs terminology, we learnt about spanning
subgraphs, a spanning subgraph of G is a subgraph
of G that we obtain by keeping all vertices
and potentially removing some edges. From this
definition we understand that a spanning tree is
a subgraph of G that contains all vertices of G.
There is also the word tree, which means
an undirected connected acyclic graph.
We deduce that a spanning tree T of
an undirected graph G is a subgraph
of G that is connected, acyclic,
and contains all its vertices.
Here is an example, we have this graph,
and a possible spanning tree is this one.
I said a possible one because a graph
can contain multiple spanning trees,
here are some possible spanning trees
of G. Why would we need it? Imagine
that we have a telephone network like this,
vertices are houses and edges are cables.
We want to allow a communication from any
house to any other house, in graph terms,
we want to have a path from any vertex to any
other vertex, we want the graph to be connected.
It's the case for this graph, but as you can
see, we have unnecessary edges, by unnecessary
we mean edges that we can remove while still
respecting the property of being connected.
And removing cables might be something beneficial
to do, we want to avoid spending money uselessly.
And this is why we need to find
a spanning tree of this network,
it contains all the houses, it connects them
all, and it doesn't contain useless cables.
Okay but how to find a spanning tree in
a graph? A spanning tree should contain
all vertices of the graph, but only
necessary edges. And a good solution
to satisfy both of these conditions is using
depth-first search or breadth-first search.
I told you that these two algorithms will be
present in a lot of algorithms we will study.
Let me tell you why using one of them works,
let's take depth-first search for example.
We know that using dfs on a connected graph
reaches all vertices, first condition is
satisfied. Also, when we know that the vertex at
the other side of the edge is already visited,
we don't go to it, so we don't take that edge,
this is why dfs doesn't use unnecessary edges.
So what we can do, is to use dfs starting from
any vertex, and keep only edges that dfs used
to reach other vertices. Remaining ones, those
that haven't been used, are considered useless,
we don't take them in our new graph.
At the end, we get a spanning tree.
To visualize it, let's apply depth-first on
this graph starting from an arbitrary vertex,
while emphasizing edges we passed from.
You can see that we got a spanning tree, it's
undirected, connected, acyclic, and contains all
vertices of the initial graph, because we reached
all vertices while saving only edges we used,
not ones we skipped. Note that the shape we get
depends on the order we use to traverse neighbors,
if we traversed them in a different
order we would get another shape,
but still a spanning tree, remember that
a graph may have multiple spanning trees,
the one we get by using dfs depends on
how we traversed neighbors of each vertex.
And we could use the same logic
with bfs, here is what we get.
We got another spanning tree, because
we traversed vertices differently.
Let's implement the solution that
uses dfs, we will use dfs as usual,
we will just add code to save
edges we traversed, that's it.
The dfs function takes as parameters the
graph, the actual vertex, the visited set,
and additional thing this time, the spanning
tree graph, the one that we will build.
As usual, we start by setting the actual
vertex as visited. Next step, we traverse
unvisited neighbors. For each neighbor, if it's
not visited, it means that we will go to it.
But before, we add the edge to the spanning tree,
we add neighbor to neighbors of the actual vertex,
and we add the actual vertex to the neighbors
of neighbor, in the spanning tree obviously.
Now we traverse the neighbor by calling dfs.
And in the main spanning_tree function, we start
by creating the spanning tree, it's empty at the
beginning. We also need a visited set for dfs.
And we need an arbitrary vertex to start dfs from,
we can just take the first one in the
list of vertices, it doesn't matter.
We have everything, we can call the function we
made to fill the spanning tree. After doing so,
we just return the spanning tree we made.
Obviously, this algorithm is in O(|V|+|E|)
time complexity because we're just applying
dfs, we can find a spanning tree in linear time.
Okay now we know how to remove unnecessary
cables, but we can still optimize the cost of this
network. How? Let's see. It's obvious that not all
cables have the same cost, one important factor is
the cable length, for example the cable FJ is more
expensive than the cable DE because it's longer.
So removing useless cables is a good thing,
but removing them in a way that minimizes
the total length of cables is better. Let
me explain this idea. We said that cables don't
have the same cost, it depends on their length.
This is why it's better to include the length
of cables in our graph, we get a weighted graph.
Now we want to remove useless cables, we want to
get a spanning tree. But, there are many ones,
and a crucial difference is the total length of
remaining cables. For example, in this network,
here are some of its spanning trees. I
didn't show them all because there are a lot.
But if we had to choose one of
them, we would take this one,
because the total length of its cables, in graph
theory terms, the sum of weights of its edges,
is the smallest possible sum. And
smaller length means smaller cost.
So among all possible spanning trees, we want to
find the one with the minimum sum of weights of
edges, it's called the minimum spanning tree. We
deduce that the definition of the minimum spanning
tree of a weighted undirected graph is the
spanning tree with the smallest sum of weights.
And minimum spanning trees have a lot of
applications, whether in networks as we've
seen in this lecture, or in other topics
such as clustering and image segmentation.
Okay but how to find the minimum spanning tree
of a graph? Do we use the algorithm we studied
at the beginning of this lecture? No, because even
if dfs and bfs traversal produce a spanning tree,
it's not guaranteed to get the one with the
minimum sum of weights. To find the minimum
spanning tree, we have other algorithms such
as Prim's algorithm and Kruskal's algorithm,
that we will study in the next lectures of this
chapter. I hope that you understood this lecture,
now get ready to learn about one of
the MST algorithms: Prim's algorithm.